federalist 65
the powers of the senate continued from
the new york packet
friday march 7 1788
hamilton
to the people of the state of new york
the remaining powers which the plan of
the convention allots to the senate in a
distinct capacity are comprised in their
participation with the executive in the
appointment to offices and in their
judicial character as a court for the
trial of impeachments
as in the business of appointments the
executive will be the principal agent
the provisions relating to it will most
properly be discussed in the examination
of that department
we will therefore conclude this head
with a view of the judicial character of
the senate
a well-constituted court for the trial
of impeachments is an object not more to
be desired than difficult to be obtained
in a government holy elective
the subjects of its jurisdiction are
those offenses which proceed from the
conduct of public men or in other words
from the abuse or violation of some
public trust
they are of a nature which may with
peculiar propriety be denominated
political as they relate chiefly to
injuries done immediately to the society
itself
the prosecution of them for this reason
will seldom fail to agitate the passions
of the whole community and to divide it
into parties more or less friendly or
inimical to the accused
in many cases it will connect itself
with the pre-existing factions and will
enlist all their animosities
partialities influence and interest on
one side or on the other and in such
cases there will always be the greatest
danger that the decision will be
regulated more by the comparative
strength of parties than by the real
demonstrations of innocence or guilt
the delicacy and magnitude of a trust
which so deeply concerns the political
reputation and existence of every man
engaged in the administration of public
affairs speak for themselves
the difficulty of placing it rightly in
a government resting entirely on the
basis of periodical elections will as
readily be perceived when it is
considered that the most conspicuous
characters in it will from that
circumstance be too often the leaders or
the tools of the most cunning or the
most numerous faction and on this
account can hardly be expected to
possess the requisite neutrality towards
those whose conduct may be the subject
of scrutiny
the convention it appears thought the
senate the most fit depository of this
important trust
those who can best discern the intrinsic
difficulty of the thing will be least
hasty in condemning that opinion and
will be most inclined to allow due wait
to the arguments which may be supposed
to have produced it
what it may be asked is the true spirit
of the institution itself
is it not designed as a method of
national inquest into the conduct of
public men if this be the design of it
who can so properly be the inquisitors
for the nation as the representatives of
the nation themselves
it is not disputed that the power of
originating the inquiry or in other
words of preferring the impeachment
ought to be lodged in the hands of one
branch of the legislative body
will not the reasons which indicate the
propriety of this arrangement strongly
plead for an admission of the other
branch of that body to a share of the
inquiry
the model from which the idea of this
institution has been borrowed pointed
out that course to the convention in
great britain it is the province of the
house of commons to prefer the
impeachment and of the house of lords to
decide upon it
several of the state constitutions have
followed the example
as well the latter as the former seemed
to have regarded the practice of
impeachments as a bridle in the hands of
the legislative body upon the executive
servants of the government
is not this the true light in which it
ought to be regarded
where else then in the senate could have
been found a tribunal sufficiently
dignified or sufficiently independent
what other body would be likely to feel
confidence enough in its own situation
to preserve on odd and uninfluence the
necessary impartiality between an
individual accused and the
representatives of the people his
accusers
could the supreme court have been relied
upon as answering this description
it is much to be doubted whether the
members of that tribunal would at all
times be endowed with so imminent a
portion of fortitude as would be called
for in the execution of so difficult
task and it is more to be doubted
whether they would possess the degree of
credit and authority which might on
certain occasions be indispensable
towards reconciling the people to a
decision that should happen to clash
with an accusation brought by their
immediate representatives
a deficiency in the first would be fatal
to the accused in the last dangerous to
the public tranquility
the hazard in both these respects could
only be avoided if at all by rendering
that tribunal more numerous than would
consist with a reasonable attention to
economy
the necessity of a numerous court for
the trial of impeachments is equally
dictated by the nature of the proceeding
this can never be tied down by such
strict rules either in the delineation
of the offense by the prosecutors or in
the construction of it by the judges as
in common cases serve to limit the
discretion of courts in favor of
personal security there will be no jury
to stand between the judges who are to
pronounce the sentence of the law and
the party who is to receive or suffer it
the awful discretion which a court of
impeachments must necessarily have to
doom to honor or to infamy the most
confidential and the most distinguished
characters of the community forbids the
commitment of the trust to a small
number of persons these considerations
seem alone sufficient to authorize a
conclusion that the supreme court would
have been an improper substitute for the
senate as a court of impeachment
there remains a further consideration
which will not a little strengthen this
conclusion
it is this
the punishment which may be the
consequence of conviction upon
impeachment is not to terminate the
chastisement of the offender
after having been sentenced to a
perpetual ostracism from the esteem and
confidence and honors and emoluments of
his country he will still be liable to
prosecution and punishment in the
ordinary course of law
would it be proper that the persons who
had disposed of his fame and his most
valuable rights as a citizen in one
trial should in another trial for the
same offense be also the disposers of
his life and his fortune
would there not be the greatest reason
to apprehend that error in the first
sentence would be the parent of error in
the second sentence that the strong bias
of one decision would be apt to overrule
the influence of any new lights which
might be brought to vary the complexion
of another decision
those who know anything of human nature
will not hesitate to answer these
questions in the affirmative and will be
at no loss to perceive that by making
the same person's judges in both cases
those who might happen to be the objects
of prosecution would in a great measure
be deprived of the double security
intended them by a double trial
the loss of life and estate would often
be virtually included in a sentence
which in its terms imported nothing more
than dismission from a present and
disqualification for a future office
it may be said that the intervention of
a jury in the second instance would
obviate the danger but juries are
frequently influenced by the opinions of
judges they are sometimes induced to
find special verdicts which refer the
main question to the decision of the
court
who would be willing to stake his life
and his estate upon the verdict of a
jury acting under the auspices of judges
who had predetermined his guilt
would it have been an improvement of the
plan to have united the supreme court
with the senate in the formation of the
court of impeachments
this union would certainly have been
attended with several advantages but
would they not have been overbalanced by
the signal disadvantage already stated
arising from the agency of the same
judges in the double prosecution to
which the offender would be liable
to a certain extent the benefits of that
union will be obtained from making the
chief justice of the supreme court the
president of the court of impeachments
as is proposed to be done in the plan of
the convention while the inconveniences
of an entire incorporation of the former
into the latter will be substantially
avoided
this was perhaps the prudent mean
i forbid a remark upon the additional
pretext for clamor against the judiciary
which so considerable an augmentation of
its authority would have afforded
would it have been desirable to have
composed the court for the trial of
impeachments of persons wholly distinct
from the other departments of the
government there are weighty arguments
as well against as in favor of such a
plan
to some minds it will not appear a
trivial objection that it could tend to
increase the complexity of the political
machine and to add a new spring to the
government the utility of which would at
best be questionable but an objection
which will not be thought by any
unworthy of attention is this
a court formed upon such a plan would
either be attended with a heavy expense
or might in practice be subject to a
variety of casualties and inconveniences
it must either consist of permanent
officers stationary at the seat of
government and of course entitled to
fixed and regular stipends or of certain
officers of the state governments to be
called upon whenever an impeachment was
actually depending
it will not be easy to imagine any third
mode materially different which could
rationally be proposed
as the court for reasons already given
ought to be numerous the first scheme
will be reprobated by every man who can
compare the extent of the public wants
with the means of supplying them
the second will be espoused with caution
by those who will seriously consider the
difficulty of collecting men dispersed
over the whole union the injury to the
innocent from the procrastinated
determination of the charges which might
be brought against them the advantage to
the guilty from the opportunities which
delay would afford to intrigue and
corruption and in some cases the
detriment to the state from the
prolonged inaction of men whose firm and
faithful execution of their duty might
have exposed them to the persecution of
an intemperate or designing majority in
the house of representatives though this
latter supposition may seem harsh and
might not be likely often to be verified
yet it ought not to be forgotten that
the demon of faction will at certain
seasons extend his scepter over all
numerous bodies of men but though one or
the other of the substitutes which have
been examined or some other that might
be devised should be thought preferable
to the plan in this respect reported by
the convention it will not follow that
the constitution ought for this reason
to be rejected
if mankind were to resolve to agree in
no institution of government until every
part of it had been adjusted to the most
exact standard of perfection society
would soon become a general scene of
anarchy and the world a desert
where is the standard of perfection to
be found who will undertake to unite the
discordant opinions of a whole community
in the same judgment of it and to
prevail upon one conceited projector to
renounce his infallible criterion for
the fallible criterion of his more
conceited neighbor
to answer the purpose of the adversaries
of the constitution they ought to prove
not merely that particular provisions in
it are not the best which might have
been imagined but that the plan upon the
whole is bad and pernicious
publius